blog: Apache DataFusion Comet 0.17.0 release post (#198)
apache/datafusion-site: content/blog/2026-06-20-datafusion-comet-0.17.0.md

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

[TOC]

The Apache DataFusion PMC is pleased to announce version 0.17.0 of the [Comet](https://datafusion.apache.org/comet/) subproject.

This release covers approximately five weeks of development work and is the result of merging 192 PRs from 19
contributors. See the [change log] for more information.

[change log]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-comet/blob/main/dev/changelog/0.17.0.md

## Fewer Fallbacks to Spark

The headline feature of 0.17.0 is a new mechanism that keeps more of your query running inside Comet instead
of falling back to Spark: the **JVM codegen dispatcher**.

Comet has always fallen back to Spark row-based execution whenever an expression had no native Rust implementation, or where the
Rust implementation could diverge from Spark on edge cases. A fallback is correct, a columnar-to-row

> conversion is needed to feed the data into Spark's row-based operators and this adds overhead when processing billions of rows of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rust implementation could diverge from Spark on edge cases. A fallback is correct, but a columnar-to-row
conversion is needed to feed the data into Spark's row-based operators, which adds overhead when processing billions of rows of data.
```

The codegen dispatcher avoids the fallback to row-based processing by running Spark's own
generated code (`doGenCode`) inside the Comet pipeline, operating directly on Arrow batches. The result is a
JVM-implemented Arrow-native expression: the data stays in Arrow format, and because the expression is
evaluated by Spark's own code, the result is guaranteed to match Spark exactly across every supported Spark

> version. When the dispatcher is disabled, Comet falls back cleanly as before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version. When the dispatcher is disabled, Comet falls back as before.
```
